cpp/README.md, before:

# C++ utilities

This directory contains various utilities for implementing evals in
C++. Interesting points of ntoe:

- `Makefile`: downloads an appropriate version of
  [json.hpp](https://github.com/nlohmann/json) - this is the JSON
  library we use for C++.

- `adbench/`: a small amount of code taken from ADBench, used for some
  evals.

- `gradbench/evals`: contains an `.hpp` file for every eval, with a
  namespace that contains various useful definitions. In particular,
  for an eval `foo` we will have `gradbench/evals/foo.hpp`, usually
  defining:

  - `foo::Input`: a JSON-deserialisable type corresponding to the eval input.

  - `foo::Output`: a JSON-serialisable type corresponding to the eval
    output - for evals with more than one function, this type will
    have some prefix (e.g. `JacOutput`).

  - `foo::objective` or some similarly named function. This will be a
    template function that can be instantiated using dual numbers or
    some other representation, if useful.

  - `foo::Objective` or some similarly named class, which will be of a
    form suitable to pass to `function_main` from
    `gradbench/main.hpp`.

Commit message:

Remove run_ prefix from C++ implementations (#473)

cpp/README.md, after:

# C++ utilities

This directory contains various utilities for implementing evals in
C++. Interesting points of note:

- `Makefile`: downloads an appropriate version of
  [json.hpp](https://github.com/nlohmann/json) - this is the JSON
  library we use for C++.

- `adbench/`: a small amount of code taken from ADBench, used for some
  evals.

- `gradbench/evals`: contains an `.hpp` file for every eval, with a
  namespace that contains various useful definitions. In particular,
  for an eval `foo` we will have `gradbench/evals/foo.hpp`, usually
  defining:

  - `foo::Input`: a JSON-deserialisable type corresponding to the eval input.

  - `foo::Output`: a JSON-serialisable type corresponding to the eval
    output - for evals with more than one function, this type will
    have some prefix (e.g. `JacOutput`).

  - `foo::objective` or some similarly named function. This will be a
    template function that can be instantiated using dual numbers or
    some other representation, if useful.

  - `foo::Objective` or some similarly named class, which will be of a
    form suitable to pass to `function_main` from
    `gradbench/main.hpp`.

## Using `gradbench/main.hpp`

From a C++ perspective, you use `gradbench/main.hpp` by calling the
function `generic_main` where the first two arguments are `argc` and
`argv`, and the third is a mapping from function names to a function
that accepts input (as a string) and then processes that input in
whatever way is appropriate (i.e., deserialises the input and runs the
function). In practice, this function is always `function_main<T>`
where `T` is a class that implements the `Function` interface. See the
code for more details.

### From the command line

You can directly run the implementations that use this interface,
without going through `gradbench`. If an implementation `foo.cpp`
compiles to a program `foo`, you can run it as follows:

```
$ ./foo input.json function
```

Here _function_ is the name of the evaluation function you wish to run
(e.g. `jacobian` or `objective`), and _input.json_ is a JSON file that
contains the equivalent of the `input` field of an `evaluate` message.
This can be useful for running C++ implementations or a debugger or a
profiler. You must usually obtain `input.json` from the log file
produced by `gradbench`, as most evals are not able to produce such
files directly.
